[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So I
decided to teach 18.156
this semester about something
called projection theory.
I think that projection theory,
although it's not usually
highlighted in
graduate real analysis,
is a fairly fundamental
thing in analysis,
a little bit like the
isoperimetric inequality
or the Sobolev inequality, maybe
not quite that fundamental,
but a fairly basic
thing that comes up
in a lot of different places.
And I was excited to teach
about it this semester
for a few reasons.
So one is that some of
the core basic questions--
one of the core basic
questions in projection theory
was just figured out in
the last couple of years.
And it's something that I'm
excited about learning about.
So I wanted to--
so that was one reason I was
excited to teach about it.
And the other reason is
that I have gradually
seen it appearing in more
and more different places.
And so I wanted to
highlight the way
it comes up in a bunch of
different parts of math.
So today in the first class,
I'm going to tell you--
I'm going to do an overview
of projection theory.
I'm going to tell you what it
is, what the questions are,
and about some of the different
applications, and maybe
a little bit about some
of the different ways
we think about it.
I guess it's a little
crowded in the back.
Are we-- I guess
the seats are full.
I'm going to start slowly.
So if you want to grab a
chair or anything, feel free.
So the setup is that we are
in Rd, or maybe also a vector
space over another field later.
And then we have
orthogonal projections.
So V in Rd is a subspace.
And pi sub v is the
orthogonal projection.
So what we're going
to do is we're going
to consider some set, x in Rd.
And then you can take
the orthogonal projection
of x in many different
directions for many different v.
And we'll study how
that all fits together.
Study x and this guy
for many different V.
So a slightly corny metaphor
for what we're doing
is we're studying some set.
And you can look at the set
from many different directions.
And we want to put
together the information
from these different
points of view.
So let me make a picture.
Red.
So we'll come back to
this picture a bunch.
So maybe x is a set of red dots.
And then we can take the
projection of this set x
onto different planes.
So if I draw sort of a--
I'll draw one plane over here.
And if I project x onto this
plane, then I will get this.
So there is pi v1 x.
But I have rigged this--
so if I project it
onto a different plane,
something a bit interesting
will happen.
Here is a different plane, v2.
And if I project my set
onto v2, all of those points
will kind of line up
on top of each other.
And all of those
points will kind of
line up on top of each other.
And all of these points kind of
Here are my observations
about this situation.
So x itself is 8 dots.
And when I projected x onto
v1, it was still 8 dots.
But when I projected it onto
v2, there were only 3 dots,
because there were a lot of
coincidences where dots got
pushed on top of each other.
Now, intuitively, v2 is kind of
special, and v1 is more typical.
So most of the v's
will be like v1.
But there'll be a
few exceptional ones
that are like v2.
So intuition is that a v2
type situation is rare.
And one of our goals is
to make that precise.
Make a precise question,
and say precisely how
rare is that behavior.
So informally, if the set
x is kind of spread out,
most of its projections will
also be kind of spread out.
There could be a few projections
where x gets kind of squished
together.
And a projection
estimate means we'll
try to quantify how often that
happens and show that it's rare.
So we will make this precise
in a bunch of different ways.
And I think the most simple to
ask question is when the set
x is a finite set.
So now let's suppose
that x is a finite set.
And I'm going to use a notation
that absolute value of x
is the cardinality of x.
So here's my setup.
I'm going to take x in R2.
And E sub s of x is
going to be the set of v.
Let me actually-- let me mention
another piece of notation.
So we're going to talk about
all these different subspaces v.
So there's a name for the
family of all subspaces.
It's called the Grassmannian.
So another piece of
Grassmannian notation
is that the Grassmannian
of k planes in Rd.
This is the set
of v and Rd, where
v is a k-dimensional subspace.
So E sub s of x is the
set of v. These are going
to be one-dimensional subspaces
in R2 with the property
that the cardinality of
pi v of x is at most s.
So going back to our basic
picture, if these red dots were
just points, then
this v2 would be
in E sub 3 of x, because
pi v2 is only 3 points.
So the first
question, if you like,
of projection theory
would be estimate
how many of these
directions there
are the size of Es of x in
terms of s and the size of x.
So what would be an
interesting set x to consider?
What would be a set x
of points or red dots
that in many
different directions
things would get squished a lot?
Do people have any thoughts?
What would be an
interesting x to look at?
AUDIENCE: A grid.
LAWRENCE GUTH: A grid, yeah.
So as an example, let's
look at a square grid.
So x is going to
be the set of pairs
a, b, where a and
b are integers,
and they go from 1 up to n.
Good.
So this set has
small projections
in a bunch of
different directions.
Let me make it a
little bit bigger.
So x has n squared points,
16 points in my picture.
If I project it down,
I only get 4 points.
If I project it to the
side, I only get 4 points.
If I project it at 45 degrees,
I also get rather few points.
I project it at 45 degrees.
The fibers of the projection
will look like this.
And they'll each have many
points, and so the projection
itself will be pretty small.
Are there other angles as
well where I could project it
and it would be pretty small?
AUDIENCE: Some rational angles?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
some rational angles.
So if we project x at a
rational angle, then pi v of x
would be small.
I'll draw one more, which I
think is enough to get the idea.
I remember when
I first saw it, I
could see the 45 degrees,
and the vertical,
and the horizontal.
So if I project it perpendicular
to these orange lines, where
it has a slope like left 1
and up 2, all of those fibers
will also be large.
And so that projection
will also be small.
Cool.
So we will compute it tomorrow
in the overview class.
I'm not going to do
computations with you.
But if you do that, you will
find the following thing,
that Es of x is around s
squared over the size of x
for a big range of values of s.
So in between x to the
1/2 and, say, 1/2 of x.
AUDIENCE: That's
specifically for the grid?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, for the grid.
Erdos did basically this
computation in the 1960s.
And he made a conjecture that
the grid is the shape that
makes these the biggest.
These had a slightly
different language,
but his conjecture
implied that the grid
is the configuration that
makes these sets the largest.
And that turned out to be true.
And it was proven in the early
'80s by Szemerédi and Trotter.
So they proved that if x is in
R2 and s is at most size of x/2,
then the size of Es
of x is at most 1
plus a constant times
what you see for the grid.
So this can be
considered, in a way,
one of the fundamental
theorems of projection theory.
And I'll mention a
couple interesting things
about the proof.
So one thing is the background
of these people, Erdos,
Szemerédi, and Trotter,
these are people
who come from combinatorics.
So this theorem represents a
connection between combinatorics
and projection theory.
And we'll talk about some
other aspects as we go along.
However, this proof is
not, at least at the time,
was not a traditional
combinatorial proof.
So they first played around with
a lot of combinatorial things,
double counting and
things like that,
and they couldn't prove it.
And then the proof eventually
uses in a crucial way
the topology of R2.
So it's an interesting
connection between topology
and this stuff.
So I'll just put here,
proof based on topology.
So this story is one important
story in projection theory.
But it's a very discrete
story about finite sets.
And there's another more
continuous, more analytic story,
which will be important
in our class, where
instead of taking a finite
set and projecting it,
we take a function, which you
can think of as like a density
function.
Before I transition
there, actually,
let me pause here and see.
Are there any questions
or comments so far?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So for the
theorem that the grid kind
of the maximizes Es of x, is
that kind of the only example?
Or is there a kind of big
class of other examples
that also reach that bound?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK, cool.
So the question is, is the
grid the only example that's
kind of tight for this theorem?
Or are there lots
of other examples?
Yeah, so another--
actually, a third thing
I like about projection
theory is that it's
full of open questions.
So it is a long-standing
open question
whether the grid is
basically the only example
or whether there
are lots of others.
In terms of other examples that
we know about, there are a few,
but I would describe them
all as very minor variations
on the grid.
And we can meet
them as we go along.
But in terms of a theorem
in the other direction,
we know very little.
So it may or may not be the
case that there are many more
examples out there.
Nice.
Other questions?
OK, great.
So now, let me describe a much
more analytic framework that
also involves projections.
And we'll see that
it's sort of related--
that it's related to this.
Now, instead of having a set,
suppose I have a function on R
to the d, say a complex value.
And I'd like you to visualize
this as a density function.
So actually, a good thing
to picture is a CAT scan.
So inside of your
body, there's something
that they'd like to scan, where
are the bones or something.
And so there's some
density of that thing.
And then the CAT
scan will shoot rays
through your bodies in
different directions.
And it will compute the integral
of that function along the ray.
And so if you stand
in front of a screen,
maybe you just have an X-ray.
X-rays go through.
And what you see on the
screen is the amount of stuff
that that X-ray went through.
So that's what we'd like
to do with this function.
So suppose here is our subspace
v. And if I have a point in it,
y, then the
orthogonal projection
maps this fiber onto y.
So that there is
pi v inverse of y.
So pi v inverse of y will
be an affine subspace.
And it has a volume
measure, which
I'm going to call d
volume sub F. The letter F
stands for fiber.
It's just to distinguish it
from d volume, which might mean
the volume on the whole space.
So then the way I will define
the projection of the function
of y is I will
integrate over the fiber
f of x d volume of the fiber.
So another way to think about
this projection of the function
is that if I were to integrate
the projection of f on some set
u in the fiber,
so maybe over here
I have some set u in my fiber.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] dy?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, it's
d volume of the fiber of y.
Yeah, this thing
you could call dy.
Is that OK?
Then this would be equal to the
integral over the preimage of u
of f of x dx.
D-- oh, I'm sorry.
You are right.
Yes, that should not be
d volume of the fiber.
Thanks there.
So yeah, this is just dy.
Or if you wanted to put
d volume of something,
it should be d volume
in the space v of y,
but not in the factor.
That's absolutely right.
What I wrote made no sense.
So if you integrate
the projection
of f over this region u.
That's the integral of f
over the whole preimage.
Do you feel like you have
an image of what this means?
So now we can play
the same game.
We start with a function.
And then you can consider
many different projections
of this function.
And there's a phenomenon, which
is similar to this phenomenon,
but the way it plays out in
this setting of functions
is that most of the
projections are smoother
than the original function.
And I'll illustrate
that with a proposition.
So proposition, if f is
just an L2 function in R7,
then for almost every v, which
is a one-dimensional subspace
in R7, if you look at the
projection of f onto v,
it is a C2 function.
So this function on R7 is an L2.
It doesn't have to be
continuous anywhere.
It certainly doesn't have
to be differentiable.
You project it onto various
one-dimensional subspaces.
Now, not every one.
There are.
There are some bad
ones, where it's
only L2, or maybe even worse.
But for most of them,
the projection is C2.
And if you play around
with these numbers,
if you make this bigger, you
can make it even smoother.
So I want to try to-- yeah.
AUDIENCE: What's special about
R7 here that makes this true?
LAWRENCE GUTH: 7 is
not that special.
But increasing this
number makes it smoother.
I mean, there are similar
theorems in any dimension.
So let me try to give some
intuition about why that is
and to try to convince you
that that is a closely related
phenomenon to the phenomenon
that we started with that
appears in the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
So what's the
intuition about this?
So I have this high
dimensional function,
which is quite irregular.
And because it's
quite irregular,
you could picture it having
many peaks and valleys
and being very jagged.
But then when you integrate
it over the fibers,
if you integrate both
a peak and a valley,
they cancel each other out.
So a lot of those peaks and
valleys cancel each other out.
And you could hope to be
left with something smoother.
Let's try to make a picture.
So I'm going to pick--
I'm going to erase
this, but I'm going
to draw a very similar picture.
So in my picture, my
f is going to have--
it's going to have
peaks on the red dots,
just to help me visualize.
So this function doesn't
exactly have values.
It's a picture of
flat landscape,
but with lots of little peaks.
And so here are some red dots to
make them a little bit fatter.
So I think I'm not going to
try to draw the function,
but what I want
you to visualize is
there's the plane
of the blackboard,
and then there's a peak coming
out over each of these things.
Now, let's try to
visualize what happens
when I project onto this space.
And in yellow, I'm going to
draw the function pi v of f.
So to help myself draw, I'll
put some little guidelines.
So out here, pi v of f is just
0, because there were no peaks.
And then it's going to
go up as I see this peak.
And then as I get here,
there are two peaks.
So that's even taller.
And then here, a little
shorter, here a little taller,
a little shorter.
It looks something like that.
You might notice already
that this is not as
jagged as the original thing.
Actually, probably,
it would be better
if I did something like this.
And because it's
the law of averages,
if I stick these around, or if
I stick them around randomly,
then because of the
law of averages,
this will be pretty steady.
And even if I don't
pick them randomly,
if I choose v randomly,
there's a certain amount
of the law of averages.
And this is going to
look relatively steady.
Cool.
So qualitatively, this
is kind of similar
to the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem.
It says that there are
only a few bad directions.
And except for those
bad directions,
when I project this
down, I will see
things kind of averaging out.
And this proposition is
one way to make it precise,
but actually, we'll spend
some time thinking together
about various ways
to make this precise.
Questions or comments?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Is it
possible sometimes
to prove the discrete
statements like this based
on the continuous versions?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, good question.
So the question is, can
we go back and forth
between these two worlds?
Can we take, say, the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem
or something like that and use
it to prove some continuous
estimates?
Or vice versa, can we take
some continuous estimates
and use it to prove
things like this?
So both of those things
are sometimes possible.
But both of those things
have some difficulties.
And in particular, there's a big
story in the field in the class
that people spent a lot of
energy trying to translate this
into the continuous setting.
And the original
proof doesn't work.
And we had to think a lot.
So maybe we'll come back to that
a little later in the class.
But there's a story I want to
share with you about how it's
difficult to get from
this discrete setting
to the continuous set.
Actually, let me say
a little bit more.
So this example is
really pretty typical.
So you can suppose that your
function is a sum of bumps
on different little balls.
And so it is just a
question about how
these different balls, small
balls are projecting down.
And it sounds, at first,
very similar to have
a bunch of delta balls
and project them down
to have a bunch of points
and project them down.
But the thickness of the
balls is really important.
It makes things different in
ways that we'll talk about.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Sorry.
Would you mind saying
a bit more about--
so if I understand
correctly, you're
saying in the typical case
of a continuous setting,
you have some [INAUDIBLE]?
In the typical case, in
the discrete setting,
you recover all the points.
Could you say a bit
more about [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
OK, great.
So the question is--
so the observation is that
in the discrete setting,
we had a theorem that says for
most directions of projections,
the images of the points are
different from each other.
They stay spread out.
And in the continuous case,
we said something else,
that if you have a
bunch of these peaks,
then in most directions
when you project,
things kind average out
and are spaced evenly.
And how are those two things
connected to each other?
Yeah, that's a great question.
So one part of it, I
think, is kind of clear.
So one part of it I
can explain easily,
and then this won't
be everything.
But if my balls were
arranged in such a way
that when I projected they went
on top of each other, so then
the projection of my function
would be really big here,
and then it would be 0, and
it would be really big here,
and it would be 0, and then
it would be really big there.
So that would not be smooth.
It would be
oscillating violently.
So if you have a direction,
which is bad in the sense
that these balls are landing
on top of each other,
then it will be bad for
this analysis problem.
But a set could be bad for this
analysis problem in another way.
There could be two balls over
here, and one ball over there,
and two balls over here,
and one ball over there,
and then the density would
still be oscillating a lot,
but the image wouldn't
be particularly small.
So that will require
some additional ideas.
But it still turns
out to be the case
that trying to prove stuff
about this, the ideas, the ideas
from ruling out this
case are related.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: It's probably the
next-- exactly the problem
relating these two,
but is there an analog
for these distributions?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Yeah.
There's an analog
for distributions.
So the question is, what if
f was a distribution instead
of a function?
Maybe it was something
messier than being an L2.
So yeah, you could
still say things.
I wasn't planning-- so I
think all of those questions
you can reduce to something
about how balls get projected.
And then if you want to,
you can say something
about distributions.
So the next character in the
story I wanted to mention to you
is the Fourier transform,
that in this continuous setup,
there's a very close connection
between this projection
operation and the
Fourier transform.
And that brings Fourier
analysis into projection theory.
So the connection with
the Fourier transform
is the following lemma.
Well, actually let me make a--
so here's our space Rd.
And in there, we have our
subspace v. So our function f
lives on R to the d.
And the projection
of f lives on v.
Now, how does the
Fourier transform work?
So here's Fourier space.
So Fourier space
is also R to the d.
So f hat will live
on R to the d.
And the Fourier transform
of something on v
lives on v as well.
So in this R to the
d, I'll draw here.
I'll call it v hat.
I guess if we wanted to, we
could call this R to the d hat.
So if I have this
function, Rd to c, then f
hat is a function R to
the d hat goes to c.
The projection of f is
a function from v to c.
And the projection of f hat
is a function from v hat to c.
And then the lemma
about how they
are related is that if you
take the projection Fourier
transform of c, it's just
f hat c for any c and v.
So let me write down the
sketch, the proof of this lemma.
It has a simple explanation.
So pi v f hat of c is
the integral over v pi v
f of y e to the
minus i xi dot y dy.
Now, what is pi v of f?
Well, it's the integral
over the fiber.
So integral over v, integral
over pi inverse of y f
of x d volume of the fiber e
to the minus i xi dot y dy.
And now notice that we
have a double integral.
We're integrating over
the fiber and over y.
So if you put those
together, you just get a dx.
Now, what happens to this
e to the minus i xi dot y?
So remark that
since x is in pi v
inverse of y, that tells us that
x minus y is perpendicular to v.
AUDIENCE: The
inverse is on the pi.
LAWRENCE GUTH: It
goes on the pi.
Thanks.
Over here is y.
Here's the fiber.
And in our fiber, we have x.
So x minus y is
perpendicular to v.
On the other hand, we also
know that the frequency xi
is in v. xi is in this
copy of v over here.
So x minus y is
perpendicular to xi.
x minus y, x minus
y dot xi is 0.
So that means I can change
this xi dot y for xi dot x.
And I put these
volume forms together.
I have the integral of
f of x e to the minus i
xi dot x dx, which
is f hat of x.
OK, cool.
So that's an interesting
connection between projections
and Fourier analysis.
And it was used classically to
solve the problem of recovering
a density from the CAT scan.
So mathematically, the problem
would be you're given pi v of f.
For every v, you
want to recover f.
And the way you can do it
is because of this formula,
you can recover--
if you're given-- if you know
all the pi v of f's, then you
can compute their
Fourier transform.
So you can compute f hat of
xi for all the xi in v hat.
Well, you have all the different
v's, so you put it together.
Now you have computed f hat.
So you can find f.
Cool.
But this connection with
the Fourier transform
also can be used to study this
continuous projection theory
problem.
And it's used to prove
this proposition here.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: What is v hat?
What's v?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, thank you.
So the question is, what's the
difference between v hat and v?
I'm not sure it was
helpful to put the hats.
It might be clearer
if we remove the hats.
So here's another
copy of R to the d,
where the variable xi lives.
And here's the same space
v. And maybe it's clearer
to remove all these hats.
So we mentioned before that this
continuous problem has something
to do with what happens
when you take balls
and you project the balls
instead of projecting points.
And it's a little
tricky to formulate
exactly what the question should
be about projecting balls.
I want to take you
through the first steps
and just see why it's
a little bit tricky
and what direction
we're going to go in.
So I have projection theory for
unit balls, maybe first steps
or something like that.
So let's say that x is
a set of disjoint unit
balls in a big ball
of radius R in R2.
So we could consider
the projection
in different directions.
And we'll have sets of unit
intervals, more or less.
And we could ask for
the number of directions
where something or
another happens.
Actually, let's step
back a little bit.
So OK, so we have a
set of unit balls.
And in this context, I'm going
to use the absolute value
of x to denote the area of x,
or volume in whatever dimension.
And hopefully, that will be
helpful and not confusing
compared with before.
If you have a bunch
of unit balls,
its area is more
or less the same
as the number of unit balls.
So then if we look at
pi v of x, that would
be the length of pi v of x.
So now I want to make a question
like the Szemerédi-Trotter
question.
So I could look at
the set of directions
where the projection has
length less than s maybe.
Maybe I'll do that.
So Es of x might be set of
v Gr 1, 2, so that pi v of x
has length at most s.
But it would now be silly to
ask for the number of elements
of this thing.
This thing is very
likely infinite,
if it's not empty,
because if you
make a tiny perturbation
in v, it will have
a tiny effect on pi v of x.
So there's a natural
discretization.
So we know that if the angle
between v1 and v2 is less than
1/R, then pi v1 of x and pi
v2 of x are basically the same
as each other.
And so it doesn't make a lot of
sense to count them separately.
So if we want to
count something,
one trick we could
make is we could
have this fancy v be a set
of R v's in Grassmann 1, 2
that are evenly spaced.
So I just draw--
oh, sorry-- r different lines
through the origin evenly spaced
at an angle of about 1/R.
And then my new
question will be,
if x is a set of disjoint unit
balls in the ball of radius R
and R2, then estimate--
yeah, so actually, let's
change this definition.
We're not going to count all
of the v's, but we're going
to count the ones in this set.
And that's a more fair
comparison to before.
So we're going to estimate the
size of Es of x in terms of s
and the size of x.
And we can compare it to the
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
So we could ask, is
it still always true
that this is bounded by
that expression there?
I'll write that down.
Is it true that Es of x
is bounded by 1 plus S
squared over x?
And this is not true.
There's a configuration of
unit balls where Es of x
is much bigger than s.
What can we do with
unit balls that
sort of wasn't relevant before
when we had perfect points?
What other example
might we look at?
Yeah, what do you think?
AUDIENCE: You could integrate
functions over them?
LAWRENCE GUTH: We could.
Yeah, so we can integrate
functions over them.
So here's a configuration
of unit balls.
It kind of doesn't
have an analog when
you're just looking at points.
But what we're going
to do is we're just
going to pack them
into a larger ball.
So here's the example.
So here's our big ball.
And then inside of it,
I have a smaller ball.
And I pack the smaller
ball full of unit balls.
So that's x.
So the area of x or the
number of unit balls
is around n squared.
And no matter what direction
I project this thing
in, it's going to fill in an
interval of length n, about n.
So for every v, I'm going
to have pi v of x around n,
which is x to the 1/2.
So if I make s equal to x
to the 1/2, or a bit less,
then Es of x is the whole
thing, every direction.
And so the size of Es of
x is R. It's all of them.
It's as big as it
could possibly be.
Whereas if you plug in s is
the square root of x here,
you would get 1.
So it's actually
as bad as possible.
The prediction of
Szemerédi-Trotter is 1,
and the truth is everything.
So these small
balls are not really
behaving like points
because of the fact
that they've been packed
so densely into a big ball.
And so if we--
it is perfectly reasonable
to analyze this situation
and answer this question.
We will do that in this class.
There is an answer to it,
and it's worth knowing.
However, as you insist that
these small balls are spread
apart farther and
farther, then they
start to behave more and
more like ideal points.
And eventually, this is true.
So a goal of this part is to add
hypotheses that the set of balls
is spread out, and then
get stronger conclusions.
And probably next class,
we will play around
with how to state some
precise hypotheses
and what kind of
conclusions we might expect.
But the big progress
that I referred to
at the beginning of
the class in the field
is that in the last couple
of years, people proved,
let's say, the main
conjecture about this question
for unit balls in R2.
And we'll try to flesh it
out, because you could imagine
many different hypotheses.
But I think the theory gives a
fairly complete picture of how
this works for balls in R2.
Different hypotheses about
how spread out they are,
and what you can conclude about
how often the projections have
things piled on
top of each other.
Now, there are many
variations on these questions.
And because this one is a
little bit difficult to state,
I thought I'd mention
one other, which
is a beautiful open problem.
And it's pretty clean to state.
And it will let me explain
one of the key difficulties.
So these questions make
sense over any field.
I started with the real numbers,
because I was kind of used
to it, because I'm an analyst.
But you could ask about any
field, any vector space.
And actually, a very interesting
case is finite fields.
So the cousin problem
over finite fields.
So let's say Fq is the
finite field with q elements.
And if I write Fp, that
will mean p is a prime.
So it's Fp of a field with
a prime number of elements.
And Fq is a general
finite field.
q will be some prime power.
So here's our question.
So now I should say, what
is an orthogonal projection?
So it's not hard to
say what a subspace is.
Over finite fields, we
don't have, obviously,
a notion of orthogonality,
but orthogonality isn't really
the crucial thing.
The crucial thing
is just that we
have a lot of linear maps
from our vector space
to a lower dimensional
vector space.
So we're really looking at
all the possible linear maps.
So in terms of what are
the possible projections,
I can parameterize
them just like this.
So if t is in Fq, pi t will be
a map from Fq squared to Fq.
And pi t of x1, x2 is
just x1 plus t times x2.
So those are a bunch
of linear maps.
And actually, you
might say, why don't I
write all the linear maps?
I could have t1 x1 plus t2 x2.
Those are all the linear maps.
But if you multiply t1
and t2 by the same factor,
then you've just
taken a linear map,
and then composed with a
linear map from Fp to itself.
So those are all going
to be equivalent for us.
And so that's why we just set
this to be 1, and let this be t.
So now let's say x is in
Fq squared and Es of x is
the set of t.
So the t just live in Fq with
the property that pi t of x
is at most s.
And now we can ask
the same question.
Question-- estimate the size
of Es of x in terms of s
and x, ideally, and
I guess maybe q.
Now, an integer grid still
makes sense over a finite field.
And so it works the same way
as in Szemerédi and Trotter.
And over the prime
fields, that's
the best example that we know.
So there is a conjecture,
if x is in Fp squared--
and p is always prime,
but it's important here,
so I will add it--
then the size of Es of
x is bounded by 1 plus
s squared over x.
Matching that.
But this is not
true in Fq squared.
q is not prime.
So let me show you an example.
And this example plays a
big role in the theory.
So here's the example.
Suppose that q is p squared.
There are similar examples
for higher powers,
but this is just
simple concrete.
So Fp is a subset of Fq.
It's a subfield of Fq.
And our set x is going
to be Fp squared, which
is a subset of Fq squared.
Cardinality of x is p
squared, which is q.
So now notice that
if t is also in Fp
and x is in x, then pi t of x,
which is x1 plus t times x2,
well, all of these characters,
I've assumed to be in Fp.
And Fp is a field.
So it's closed under addition,
closed under multiplication.
So this is in Fp.
So that tells me that if t
is in Fp, pi T of x is Fp--
is contained in Fp.
It's actually all of it.
And so the size of pi
t of x is at most p,
which is q to the 1/2, which is
much smaller than the size of x.
So we conclude that the size
of Ep of x is at least p.
So there are p traces t
that all lie in Ep of x.
And that's much bigger than
the bound in the conjecture
for what should happen
over prime fields.
So if we were to plug in
these numbers up here,
s would be p, which is
the square root of q,
and x would be q.
So this would be y.
Over prime fields, this
should be order of 1.
But over this not prime
field, it's much bigger.
So this shows that
projection theory is also
connected to some--
I don't know-- algebra,
algebraic structure questions
of whether fields
have subfields.
And this issue, which is--
so this is an open conjecture.
And it's hard for two reasons.
The first reason is,
well, you look at it.
You say, OK, it's like
Szemerédi-Trotter,
but over a prime field.
So I should try to take the
proof of Szemerédi-Trotter.
And that proof
completely breaks down.
That proof was based
on the topology
of R. We'll go through
it, but the topology of R
and the topology of
Fp are very different.
And it just doesn't work at all.
The second reason is that the
statement of the conjecture
really requires
this to be prime.
And so it's not
true for any field.
It's only true for prime fields.
And so you have to
wonder, how are we
going to use that in the proof?
And a lot of methods,
a lot of methods
don't distinguish between prime
fields and non-prime fields.
And therefore, they can't
prove the whole thing.
In the real analysis
setting, actually, there's
the same issue.
So these theorems that I
wasn't able to state precisely
for you today, they
are true over R2,
but they are false in C2,
because the complex numbers have
a subfield R. So the complex
numbers play the role of Fq,
where q is p squared.
And so over here, also,
we need to do something
to distinguish between
the complex numbers
and the real numbers.
And many techniques
don't do that.
So a bit surprisingly,
these real analysis problems
that eventually get used in
estimates and Fourier analysis
with integral operators that
really look like analysis, they
take something from these
questions over finite fields.
These are more closely related
to each other than either one
of them is to that first
Szemerédi-Trotter theorem.
So at the beginning
of the class,
I will teach you some classical
techniques, some double counting
techniques, some Fourier
analysis techniques.
Hold on a second.
And they prove
interesting things.
And they work over here.
But they don't distinguish
between the prime fields
and the not-prime fields.
Yeah.
Was there a question?
AUDIENCE: Does the
fact that the reals
have the rationals as a subfield
end up mattering for this?
Or just kind of the topology
argument [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Ah, OK.
So the question is--
so the observation
is, I said that the situation
for Fq, when q is p squared,
is kind of complicated, because
Fq has a subfield, namely Fp.
And then I tried to say
there's something similar
going on with the complex
numbers and the real numbers.
Now, the observation
is the real numbers
have many proper subfields.
One of them is the
rational numbers.
There are many
more number fields.
Doesn't that matter?
Yeah, that's a good thing
for us to reflect on.
It turns out not to
matter that much.
And it's because those
subfields are so small.
The real numbers are an
infinite order extension
of the rational numbers.
I think even an
uncountable order extension
of the rational
numbers, whereas Fq
is a degree 2 extension of Fp.
So one way people talk
about it is in terms
of Hausdorff dimension.
So the real numbers
have subfields,
but their Hausdorff
dimension is either 0
or 1 if it's the whole real
numbers and not in the middle.
Anyway, we'll have a look at it.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Do you have any
intuition about why things
unfold for the small fields?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Why you can't do
something bad with small fields?
AUDIENCE: Yeah, if I understand
the intuition correctly,
the real numbers are
fine, because they're
large enough extension
over the rationals.
So I don't know.
I'm just wondering
if you have something
about the size of the space.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So here's
an analogy for you.
So what if we didn't
have p squared?
What if we had p to the 17th?
Now, Fq still has a
subfield Fp, but it's
kind of a small subfield.
We could do the
same computation.
We would see that this
doesn't fully hold,
but for sets that are
pretty large, for sets
that are a lot larger than
that, we would still--
we might still hope
for pretty good bounce.
And I think that the situation
for the small subfields of R
is similar to that.
AUDIENCE: So is this conjecture
known for any prime number
or is it for every prime?
So I want to prove this
conjecture for R. [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So we
stick this tilde here,
which means there's a
missing constant factor.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: We do
that to be safe, I guess.
It probably is true with
a small constant factor.
But strictly speaking,
you can't falsify it
with one prime number.
But that's not the real reason.
Then you might say, if you take
a medium prime number, like 101,
could you check it numerically?
Maybe for 100-- even for
101, I don't have any wisdom
about how to do this.
And if you literally
did it by brute force
and checked all the
possibilities x,
you really couldn't go very far.
And I'm not sure if
we'll address this,
but there is a computational
question, like, maybe I
can't prove this conjecture,
but do I understand it
well enough that I could
prove it for a particular p
faster than brute force?
I don't.
And so we're not able to
have much numerical evidence.
Yeah, it could be worth
looking for a counterexample
on the computer.
The evidence is not that strong
in favor of this conjecture.
OK, cool.
In the last 15 minutes, I
wanted to mention to you
some other parts of math
that this connects to.
So one connection is to a part
of combinatorial number theory
called sum product theory, which
we'll see it fits in naturally
with this issue.
So in this example, this
set that we're worried about
is closely connected
to the fact that Fq
has a interesting subfield,
an interesting subset that's
closed under addition
and multiplication.
And the field-- the sum product
theory and combinatorial number
theory is about what
happens to a set
under addition and
multiplication.
So initially, it's
over R over the reals.
But then you can
ask in any field.
So let's say that R is a ring.
So we can define
sums and products.
And A is a subset
of R. So A plus A
is all of the sums you can
make, two elements of A.
So it's the set of all the A1
plus A2, where A1 and A2 are
in A. And the
product set A times
A is similar to the set
of all the products.
So actually, motivating
this from before,
what was so bad about this
set Fp as a subset of Fq?
The problem was just that, well,
if these three guys are in Fp,
then x1 plus t times
x2 is still in Fp.
So the problem was that
Fp is closed under sums
and under products.
So it raises the
question, are there
other sets that are maybe not
exactly closed, but roughly
closed under sums and products?
So the idea of sum product
theory is take a subset, A in R.
Could it happen that both
A plus A and A times A are
pretty small?
So let me mention
a few examples.
So if A is a subset of the
real numbers, which is generic,
then A plus A and A
times A would both be
around the size of A squared.
So generically, there would
be no coincidences in the sums
or in the products.
But it could happen that
A plus A is not very big.
So if A is an
arithmetic progression,
then the size of A plus A is
only around 2 times the size
of A. But in this case, A
times A would be very big.
On the other hand, if A is
a geometric progression,
then the size of A times A would
be around 2 times the size of A.
But A is a geometric
progression,
then A plus A would be very big.
So based on these few
examples, Erdos and Szemerédi
conjectured that always
one of these guys is big.
So here's their conjecture,
as it's still an open problem.
If A is a finite
subset of the reals,
then the maximum of A
plus A and A times A
is at least C epsilon A
to the 2 minus epsilon.
So for every-- so
at the beginning,
I should put for every
epsilon bigger than 0.
So it's not quite a squared.
That example comes from
taking the numbers 1 to n.
Then A plus A is
clearly quite small.
A times A is many of the
integers from 1 to n squared,
but not all of them.
Some of them have a prime
factor that's bigger than n.
So they're not in the list.
And Erdos computed
that carefully.
So he said you need the epsilon.
So this type of
problem is connected
to progression-- to
projection theory because
of this type of example.
And the connection goes
in both directions.
So in one direction,
there's a theorem
of Elekes about the
sum product theorem.
So we can't prove this.
But any exponent here
that's bigger than 1
would be non-trivial.
And we can prove
it with exponents
that are bigger than 1.
And historically,
there was a big jump
in the quality of the exponent
when Elekes proved this theorem.
So he proved that A is a
subset of R, which is finite,
then the maximum of A plus
A and A times A is at least
A to the 5/4.
And the key ingredient in the
proof was Szemerédi-Trotter.
That's not the whole
proof, but the proof uses
Szemerédi-Trotter,
and not much else.
It's quite short.
And so if you know something
about projection theory,
you can say something
about sum-product theory.
But later things went
in the other direction.
So there's a theorem of
Bourgain, Katz, and Tao,
which says that not only
a prime field does not
have any subfields,
which we knew,
but it doesn't have
anything that's
even close to being a subring.
So if p is prime and A
is a subset of Fp and A
is not too big.
So it's not super important
what this number is,
but A is significantly
smaller than the whole field.
The maximum of A
plus A and A times A
is at least the size of
A to the 1 plus epsilon,
where epsilon is a small,
but explicit number.
Think something like 1/20.
This theorem is actually more
accessible than projection
theory in general.
Having these sums and
products gives you
a little bit more structure.
It turns out to be important.
But it shows that
in Fp, over Fp there
is no example which is too
much like this example.
You can't just choose
a subset of Fp,
which is almost closed
under sums and products,
and then mimic this argument.
And it's not
immediate, but this is
used to improve the projection
theory in Fp squared.
And something similar
will also happen
for problems about balls in R2.
I wanted to mention
some other applications,
but I don't want to cram things
in too much in the last 5
minutes.
I'll just say a few
words, and then I'll
pause for final questions.
So one application or
story is from sieve theory
in number theory.
So in sieve theory,
you have a set
of integers instead of a set
of points in a vector space.
And in sieve theory,
we study what
happens if you take
the set of integers
and you reduce it mod p or mod
q for many different numbers q?
And there are some questions
about general sets, like,
could it happen that you
have a set of integers?
And whenever you reduce
it mod q for any q,
you always get something small?
What could you say about
your set of integers?
So an interesting example of
that are the square numbers.
If you take the squares and you
reduce it mod p for any prime--
you start with primes--
you get the quadratic
residues, which is only half
of the residue classes.
So whenever you reduce
it mod p, you only
get half of the residue classes.
How many other sets
of integers can you
think of that whenever
you reduce the mod p,
you only get half of
the residue classes?
How big could such a
set of integers be?
What fraction of
all the integers?
And so on.
So there's one set of
questions about this.
And there's another
set of questions
where you take a
particular set of integers
that you might be interested
in, of which the most famous is
the primes.
And you think about
what happens when
you reduce the set the primes
mod q for many different q.
So it appears to be the case
that the prime numbers are
evenly distributed
mod q for every q.
Actually, depending on how you
quantify it, that's a theorem.
So if you fix a q and you
take the primes mod q,
and you take primes up to
x, where x is much, much,
much bigger than q.
They will be evenly distributed
among the residue classes mod
q that are possible,
the ones that
have no common factor with q.
But you could have--
you might also
want to know if you take the
primes up to some fixed x
and you reduce them mod
q for many different q,
it still appears-- it
appears that those are evenly
distributed for quite big
q, even q's that are only
slightly less than x.
We can't prove
anything like that.
But there's a line of
thought that maybe we
could relax what we're
trying to prove a little bit.
And instead of trying
to prove it for every q,
we could try to prove
it for most of the q.
Now we're in this setting
where we have one fixed set,
and we're looking
at how it reduces
mod q for many different q.
And that problem is very
similar to the projection theory
problem.
So anyway, so we'll teach some
core techniques of projection
theory that were developed by
people in geometric measure
theory in the '60s,
'70s, and '80s.
And those are almost--
those are very closely parallel
to the classic techniques
of sieve theory that
were developed by people
in the '40s, '50s, '60s.
So interesting
connections there.
In sieve theory, there
are lots of open problems.
So that's one set of
applications, if you like,
or connections.
And the other one I wanted to
mention is dynamical systems.
So Elon Lindenstrauss last
year gave the Simons lectures.
And one of the things
was about taking orbits
in homogeneous
spaces, unipotent--
so I don't have time to say
what all the things are.
But you take unipotent
orbits in homogeneous spaces,
then they distribute
very evenly.
So there are some classical
important theorems about that.
And the recent thing
he and Amir Mohammadi
were trying to make
it more quantitative.
And a new idea in
their proof is they
brought in projection theory.
So anyway, so I will tell
you the story, slowly.
First of all, what
is the question?
And then, what does it have
to do with projection theory?
So those are some applications
I was thinking that I'd
like to talk about with you.
OK.
Any last questions or comments?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: I was
wondering if you'll
tell us about the [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So the question
is that the Szemerédi-Trotter
theorem is usually set
in a different way,
actually a more general way,
where you have a set of lines.
And you look at the
points that have
many lines going through them.
And we'll see that this is
a corollary or special case
of that.
AUDIENCE: That's like the
version of this [INAUDIBLE]
problem in Fp.
They are quite different.
For example, if
you just estimate
the number of average points, we
know that the bulk in our tree
does not hold.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Let's talk about
that after class.
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK, good.
Let's stop there for today.
I will see you on Thursday.